doc/git-scenarios-and-what-to-do-about-them.md, before:

# Git scenarios and what to do about them

Here are the different scenarios you could find yourself in and what to do
about them.

-   1: You have a clone of a Numberscope repository.
    -   1.A: You haven't made changes.
        -   [Create a fork](./working-with-git-and-github#create-a-fork).
        -   [Clone your fork](./working-with-git-and-github#clone-a-repo).
        -   [Create a branch](./working-with-git-and-github#create-a-branch).
        -   [Push a branch](./working-with-git-and-github#push-a-branch).
        -   [Read about basic Git operations](./working-with-git-and-github#basic-git-operations).
    -   1.B: You have made changes.
        -   1.B.1: You are working on the main branch.
            -   1.B.1.A: You made commits.
                -   Ask someone at Numberscope for help
            -   1.B.1.B: You haven't made commits.
            -   [Stash your changes](./working-with-git-and-github#stash-your-changes).
            -   [Create a branch](./working-with-git-and-github#create-a-branch).
            -   [Create a fork](./working-with-git-and-github#create-a-fork).
            -   [Add the remote of your fork](./working-with-git-and-github#add-a-remote).
            -   [Push the branch to your fork](./working-with-git-and-github#push-a-branch).
            -   [Clone your fork](./working-with-git-and-github#clone-a-repo).
            -   [Read about basic Git operations](./working-with-git-and-github#basic-git-operations).
        -   1.B.2: You are working on a different branch.
            -   1.B.2.A: You have made commits.
                -   [Create a fork](./working-with-git-and-github#create-a-fork).
                -   [Add the remote of your fork](./working-with-git-and-github#add-a-remote).
                -   [Push the branch to your fork](./working-with-git-and-github#push-a-branch).
                -   [Clone your fork](./working-with-git-and-github#clone-a-repo).
                -   [Read about basic Git operations](./working-with-git-and-github#basic-git-operations).
            -   1.B.2.B: You haven't made commits.
                -   [Commit your changes](./working-with-git-and-github#commit-changes).
                -   [Create a fork](./working-with-git-and-github#create-a-fork).
                -   [Add the remote of your fork](./working-with-git-and-github#add-a-remote).
                -   [Push the branch to your fork](./working-with-git-and-github#push-a-branch).
                -   [Clone your fork](./working-with-git-and-github#clone-a-repo).
                -   [Read about basic Git operations](./working-with-git-and-github#basic-git-operations).
-   2: You have a fork of a Numberscope repository.
    -   2.A: You haven't made changes.
        -   [Clone your fork](./working-with-git-and-github#clone-a-repo) (if
            you don't have it on your computer yet).
        -   [Create a branch](./working-with-git-and-github#create-a-branch).
        -   [Push a branch](./working-with-git-and-github#push-a-branch).
        -   [Read about basic Git operations](./working-with-git-and-github#basic-git-operations).
    -   2.B: You have made changes.
        -   2.B.1: You are working on the main branch.
            -   2.B.1.A: You made commits.
                -   Ask someone at Numberscope for help.
            -   2.B.1.B: You haven't made commits.
                -   [Stash your changes](./working-with-git-and-github#stash-your-changes).
                -   [Create a branch](./working-with-git-and-github#create-a-branch).
                -   [Unstash your changes](./working-with-git-and-github#unstash-your-changes).
                -   [Push a branch](./working-with-git-and-github#push-a-branch).
                -   [Read about basic Git operations](./working-with-git-and-github#basic-git-operations).
        -   2.B.2: You are working on a different branch.
            -   2.B.2.A: You have made commits.
                -   [Read about basic Git operations](./working-with-git-and-github#basic-git-operations).
            -   2.B.2.B: You haven't made commits.
                -   [Commit your changes](./working-with-git-and-github#commit-changes).
                -   [Read about basic Git operations](./working-with-git-and-github#basic-git-operations).

Commit message:

docs: add goal to git scenarios doc
For https://github.com/numberscope/frontscope/pull/171#discussion_r998367656

doc/git-scenarios-and-what-to-do-about-them.md, after:

# Git scenarios and what to do about them

If you find yourself with a Git setup that isn't what Numberscope requires
(i.e. do your work in your own fork on a feature branch), you might be able to
use this guide to fix your setup.

Here are the different scenarios you could find yourself in and what to do
about them.

-   1: You have a clone of a Numberscope repository.
    -   1.A: You haven't made changes.
        -   [Create a fork](./working-with-git-and-github#create-a-fork).
        -   [Clone your fork](./working-with-git-and-github#clone-a-repo).
        -   [Create a branch](./working-with-git-and-github#create-a-branch).
        -   [Push a branch](./working-with-git-and-github#push-a-branch).
        -   [Read about basic Git operations](./working-with-git-and-github#basic-git-operations).
    -   1.B: You have made changes.
        -   1.B.1: You are working on the main branch.
            -   1.B.1.A: You made commits.
                -   Ask someone at Numberscope for help
            -   1.B.1.B: You haven't made commits.
            -   [Stash your changes](./working-with-git-and-github#stash-your-changes).
            -   [Create a branch](./working-with-git-and-github#create-a-branch).
            -   [Create a fork](./working-with-git-and-github#create-a-fork).
            -   [Add the remote of your fork](./working-with-git-and-github#add-a-remote).
            -   [Push the branch to your fork](./working-with-git-and-github#push-a-branch).
            -   [Clone your fork](./working-with-git-and-github#clone-a-repo).
            -   [Read about basic Git operations](./working-with-git-and-github#basic-git-operations).
        -   1.B.2: You are working on a different branch.
            -   1.B.2.A: You have made commits.
                -   [Create a fork](./working-with-git-and-github#create-a-fork).
                -   [Add the remote of your fork](./working-with-git-and-github#add-a-remote).
                -   [Push the branch to your fork](./working-with-git-and-github#push-a-branch).
                -   [Clone your fork](./working-with-git-and-github#clone-a-repo).
                -   [Read about basic Git operations](./working-with-git-and-github#basic-git-operations).
            -   1.B.2.B: You haven't made commits.
                -   [Commit your changes](./working-with-git-and-github#commit-changes).
                -   [Create a fork](./working-with-git-and-github#create-a-fork).
                -   [Add the remote of your fork](./working-with-git-and-github#add-a-remote).
                -   [Push the branch to your fork](./working-with-git-and-github#push-a-branch).
                -   [Clone your fork](./working-with-git-and-github#clone-a-repo).
                -   [Read about basic Git operations](./working-with-git-and-github#basic-git-operations).
-   2: You have a fork of a Numberscope repository.
    -   2.A: You haven't made changes.
        -   [Clone your fork](./working-with-git-and-github#clone-a-repo) (if
            you don't have it on your computer yet).
        -   [Create a branch](./working-with-git-and-github#create-a-branch).
        -   [Push a branch](./working-with-git-and-github#push-a-branch).
        -   [Read about basic Git operations](./working-with-git-and-github#basic-git-operations).
    -   2.B: You have made changes.
        -   2.B.1: You are working on the main branch.
            -   2.B.1.A: You made commits.
                -   Ask someone at Numberscope for help.
            -   2.B.1.B: You haven't made commits.
                -   [Stash your changes](./working-with-git-and-github#stash-your-changes).
                -   [Create a branch](./working-with-git-and-github#create-a-branch).
                -   [Unstash your changes](./working-with-git-and-github#unstash-your-changes).
                -   [Push a branch](./working-with-git-and-github#push-a-branch).
                -   [Read about basic Git operations](./working-with-git-and-github#basic-git-operations).
        -   2.B.2: You are working on a different branch.
            -   2.B.2.A: You have made commits.
                -   [Read about basic Git operations](./working-with-git-and-github#basic-git-operations).
            -   2.B.2.B: You haven't made commits.
                -   [Commit your changes](./working-with-git-and-github#commit-changes).
                -   [Read about basic Git operations](./working-with-git-and-github#basic-git-operations).
